Authentication and Authorisation (#13)
iver-wharf/rfcs: _published/0013-authentication.md

---
layout: default

# This is just to fool remark-stringify not to escape & symbols

# See https://github.com/syntax-tree/mdast-util-to-markdown/issues/8

shields_io_query_params: label=issue%20state&logo=github&style=flat-square

# Update the following (it's YAML syntax)

pr_id: 13 # Update this with PR number/ID. No leading zeros
rfc_feature_name: authentication & authorization # Use kebab-case
title: "RFC-0013: authentication & authorization" # Update this with PR number/ID and feature name. Use leading zeros
rfc_author_username: fredx30
rfc_author_name: Fredrik Dyrvold # Or same as username, if you wish

# Leave these. Collaborator changes this before merging

impl_issue_id: 0 impl_issue_repo: iver-wharf/wharf-api last_modified_date:

> 2021-06-16

Reviewer: nit:

```suggestion
impl_issue_id: 0
impl_issue_repo: iver-wharf/wharf-api
last_modified_date: YYYY-MM-DD
```

Author: Thanks, will try to fix the formatting issues related to this special meta info at a more final stage i have no way of highlighting these issues on a normal work basis.

Roll-Based Access Control. The initial implementation will also be limited
to only sourcing from 1 identity provider at a time, it will however be
possible to extend this to multiple different sources later.

## Dictionary

- OIDC - [OpenID Connect (OIDC)](https://openid.net/connect)
- IDP - Identity provider - some examples include
  [Google Workspace](https://workspace.google.com/intl/sv),
  [Azure AD](https://azure.microsoft.com/en-us/services/active-directory), and
  [Auth0/Okta](https://www.okta.com/)
- RBAC - [Roll-Based Access Control](https://auth0.com/docs/authorization/rbac/)
- Issuer - In this RFC this refers to the issuer field in a OIDC metadata
  sheet. The issuer is an authority for validating JWT tokens used in OIDC.

## Motivation

Some claim a good feature of secure infrastructure is access control. Currently,
our only solution is network isolation. Being able to restrict access to varying
degrees is also a product goal to satisfy business needs.

Tying the user management of wharf to central repositories such as
organisation wide IDPs is good for a number of reasons.
- Centrally managed on/off boarding:
   - Leads to less administration

>    - Roll based security inheritance allows automatic updates of user access

Reviewer 2: Ro**ll** based -> Ro**le**-based?

     levels
- Piggybacking on existing password and user recovery routines results in a
  DRY style system architecture
- Near perfectly mirrored compliance with top level organisational
  security levels

## Explanation

By using the OIDC standard an authentication & authorisation system will be
built in a minimalist fashion that offloads most of the work involved in
administration to other pre-existing platforms.

> ![Connectivity visualised](../assets/auth-map-v2.PNG)

Reviewer: Why does the Remote IDP talk directly to Wharf's database?

nit: Shouldn't the Remote IDP be placed in the "Wide area network" area? Like on the same side as the "Cronjob & Automation", but not on the same side as the "User Agent"

Author: Good tips.
The line connecting the IDP to the wharf DB was a remenant from the hydra setup. Its now removed.
Updated some other aspects aswell. It should be clearer now.
![auth_map_v2](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/4283527/131484539-9490e0ec-30a9-4351-bc8e-f13d997f01cb.PNG)

#### The ID Token
A OIDC type ID-token can be used for authentication. The custom claims
(requires an IDP with support for RBAC) specified within the ID-token can
then be used to specify access levels. To keep the scope manageable the task
of dividing up and refining access levels and permission will be left to a
later date. For this RFC all kinds of read permissions won't require valid
ID-tokens, but all write type requests will require valid ID-tokens that
have been signed by a pre-approved issuer.
The OIDC protocol defines a token called an
[ID Token](https://auth0.com/docs/tokens/id-tokens/id-token-structure).
The ID token is signed by the source issuer. This signature is then used to
validity and authenticity of the token. See
[validating an OIDC ID-Token](https://connect2id.com/blog/how-to-validate-an-openid-connect-id-token).

#### Sessions
The wharf-api is currently stateless and does not use sessions. It is
possible to either include the ID token in every request to the server or to

> start using sessions to store the ID token between requests.

Reviewer: This feels undecided. Would like an iron fist on this. Are we implementing sessions, are we using a third-party lib to deal with the sessions, or are we requesting a new ID token on each request?

Author: Good point. I think we should keep the sessionless state of things. I belive sound design dictates statelessness whereever possible.

Author: The id token and access token are stored by the frontend for as long as allowed untill the refresh token is used to request a new set. For now that timeout is 1 hour. The access token is sent to the backend on every request. The id token is kept by the frontend for visuals such as seeing what user you logged in as.

#### Local development vs production environments
For the initial release of the feature the configuration will be tailored to
using azure as an IDP. These settings will as necessary be exposed as

> environment variables to each respective docker image.

Reviewer: I think I understand what you mean with "to each respective docker image" here, but could you phrase it as explicit?

Author: Explicit how? Listing the names of the names of the docker images does not seem relevant. Im still finding it relativly hard to deal with the particular loadup sequences on the different settings so i dont have an exact on how that will work. The reason i want to keep it relativly vauge is the lack of exacts untill the work is finished.

Reviewer: Re-reading it I understand now better than when I wrote the comment, and no longer find it an issue in the formulation.

Marking as resolved.

#### Choice of Client

The OIDC standard defines a
[list of certified clients](https://openid.net/developers/certified/)
that can help simplify the implementation of ID Token retrieval.

For the backend a full client will not be required. As the tokens just need
to be validated and not requested. Validation can be done offline by caching
the issuers' signature for future validations (OBS! The signature key may

> rotate on a timely basis).

Reviewer: Q: Is this where the session management is needed? Is not the ID Token a valid standalone auth source (except for the IDP's public cert used for validation)?

Author: The problem is the potential preformance risk of having an excessive number of requests fetching the IDP issuer keys.
No caching of the public keys for the IDP does not relate to sessions. Without caching the issuer public keys for the IDP a request to fetch would have to be made for every authorization request (or in the stateless session variety - every request). 
If we kept sessions then we would only have to authenticate once per session. This would almost entierly rid us of the edit: ~~imminent~~ minor preformance problem.

Author: Perhaps we shold a brainstomring meeting on this one.

Author: I have done som poking around the problem on this one and this seems to be a very minor problem which is probably best solved later and left as simple as possible now.

## Compatibility

Expect no compatability between versions of wharf without authentication to
versions of wharf with authentication. There is a potential threat in leaving
the system backwards compatible in that a non-secured version of the api could
run together in an otherwise secure cluster.

We should aim to pick a solution where any IDP supporting OIDC and RBAC can be
used. Locking ourselves to a single IDP when a standard such as OIDC exists
seems like a  waste opportunity. Keeping the choice of IDP open will leave

> more room for choice and flexibility in the future.

Reviewer: Will this solution mean Wharf is incompatible with IDPs without RBAC support? Or will just the fine-grain user control be missed out? Like, can Wharf use an IDP without RBAC but then all users will be treated as sysadmins, or will that not work at all?

Author: Requesting custom claims that dont exsist on a source IDP that cant define custom claims will always return false. So in our scenario we could get the id token but we could never get any form of higher priviledge.

Author: This could be a section to move into a finished discussion form in `alternative considered`.

## Alternative solutions

There are many types of identity verification systems.
This RFC assumes that OIDC will be used. Within OIDC there are multiple
different [flow definitions](https://developer.okta.com/docs/concepts/oauth-openid/#choosing-an-oauth-2-0-flow).
We should primarily use `codeflow with pkce` as this is presumed to be the

> most secure, and best compatible at the time of writing.

Reviewer: Would be nice with a note here to explain "(best compatible) with what?", such as best compatible with our combination of SPA web and sole REST API access, or just because we have a SPA web?

Author: I believe the thought was current security practices. Implicit and hybrid code flows dont usually seem to be held in as high a regard for user agent authorisation. 
There is still some intresting testing to be done here for implicit trust towards implicitly trusted clients operating autonomously. There should probably be some info here on how id tokens and custom claims work. That also requires more testing.

Author: The limitations here dont seem to be technical as much as beurocratic. On the technical side this is meant to enable even the most complex and secure flows making it easier to convince the beurocrats the tech is ok to implement.
I ran the tests on creating the tokens autonomously as a trusted client and it appears to work in most fashions. Once the tokens are recieved the flow towards the api is identical to the web. The custom roles appear to work as well but production environment final tests are still blocked.

Author: The new rewording is slightly more abiguous to allow this to be solved in implementation/configuration rather than stated in the RFC.

Reviewer: > making it easier to convince the beurocrats the tech is ok to implement.

Lol

> The new rewording is slightly more abiguous to allow this to be solved in implementation/configuration rather than stated in the RFC.

:+1: 

I'm glad with the explanation. Resolving.

## Future possibilities

We may want to implement multiple different IDP sources. This could allow

> login from different sources than the Iver-Azure-AD. A sample situation

Reviewer 3: No internal references allowed, sorry

```suggestion
login from different sources than a single Azure-AD. A sample situation
```

This is not written down somewhere, except for this comment here and now, but we got directive to not make any company nor product references throughout the project, not even to Iver itself. Partially to make it seem more open and inviting, but more importantly as a hard line so we don't accidentally slip out references to confidential products or partners.

Iver relying on an Azure AD is not a peice of information that will necessarily collapse the company if it gets into the wrong hands, but it has been declared that we still should refrain from referencing the company where it's not necessary.

I can agree that it's kind of a flimsy rule, but I like it for the fact that it makes us less potent in accidentally exposing confidential or dangerous information.

Author: I understand the principals and values in this case the iver ad is public info if not explicitly written then atleast through dns definitions. In this case its the only motivator i know for picking azure ad the IDP. In all other aspects i believe auth0/okta is a better choice in wharf's case.

where this could be useful is where/when we wish to give a client
view/control over the deployment pipeline.

> When handling ID-Tokens from RBAC enabled IDPs its is possible to verify

Reviewer: nit: typo

```suggestion
When handling ID-Tokens from RBAC enabled IDPs it's possible to verify
```

custom permission levels using custom role claims.
[See this link](https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/azure/role-based-access-control/custom-roles)
for more information about custom claims. This system allows for setup
fine-tuned access control on a per-deployment basis. The initial setup
for each of the different RBACs will likely require setup scripts on a
per-provider basis as it requires interaction directly with each respective

> cloud on a non-standard basis.

Reviewer: nit: Would rather see this just documented instead of scripted. It should be such a one-time and only necessary when users needs more access. And just having some example docs of how to properly set this up with different IDPs so those with undocumented IDPs could connect the dots themselves.

Don't know exactly what you refer to with "setup scripts", so excuse me if I misunderstood

Author: At this point i imagine there will be just one custom role so the manual work of setting on role up wont be heavy. The scripts would have to serve as documentation if they were to be written. The scripts if written for instance for azure ad would for instance setup an app registration with a name and designate a certain user the app registration admin, then it could also initiate the app registration with a correct set of custom role(s - multiple at a later point), perhaps it would even be appropriate to ensure the correct securtiy settings regarding code flows are set.

Author: I have reworded this such that its left up to the implementation. 

The decision on which IDP to use for authentication will need to be made and customised in setup per instance.

Since this is not a one-time setup i would personally have this setup be automated rather than manual. Personally i also belive code can serve as documentation. The setup is likely needed to be done one per instance of wharf.

Reviewer: Alright! Convinced :)

## Unresolved questions

OIDC in any form demands full SSL security in all connections. In order to
avoid having to fill the development environment with --force-unsecure
bindings we should consider implementing certificate generation and importing

> for dev environments.

Reviewer: We can tell traefik to use a locally generated certificate. Ex: https://github.com/traefik/traefik/issues/5507#issuecomment-535603881. Need to be careful not to use the same cert across all us devs by storing it in the repo, as that would be an insane attack vector.

But instead we could have an extra step to the docker-compose setup, something like:

1. Generate cert using openssl, for example as defined in a `Makefile`
2. Trust the newly generated certificate, with different docs for windows and linux. For example in linux it would be something like this (which could also be inserted into a `Makefile`):
   ```sh
   sudo cp wharf-local-dev.crt /usr/local/share/ca-certificates/wharf-local-dev.crt
   sudo update-ca-certificates
   ```
3. ```sh
   docker-compose up
   ```
Voila

Author: Good plan! Will write this into a todo for the wharf-docker-compose repo as a subtask of auth.

Author: Perhaps the domain name `wharf.local` might be a good starting point aswell. Probably an easy switch later in implementation.

Reviewer: Having to add `wharf.local` into your `hosts` file seems like extra unneeded work. Think we should register the local certs to simply `localhost`. Maybe a more unique port than `:5000`, but still.

Is there something particular you're thinking of for going with `wharf.local` instead of `localhost`?

Author: Potentially add a frontend warning if communicating on http non-secure

Author: Given localhost is possible that seems much better.

Author: This is semi rewritten for the subtitle  `### SSL Config Required as a part of OIDC` now.

Should we keep the wharf-api stateless and send the id-token in every
request or should we create sessions and store the id token in each user's

> session?

Reviewer: Is the idea not to store the ID token on the client-side? Like in localStorage or in cookies?

Are ID-Tokens meant to only be seen by the server, or are they given to the server by the user? In the case of the latter, we could instead just rely on the user always providing the ID-token themselves on each request, letting them keep track of the session and keeping the wharf-api stateless.

Reviewer: Actually, since it's a SPA web, we could just store it in memory and force a new ID-token on every page refresh. That way there's a smaller attack surface as no malicious code could find the token from cookies or localStorage.

Bonus point: if someone gets new roles in the IDP, all they have to do is refresh the page to have it apply

Author: > Actually, since it's a SPA web, we could just store it in memory and force a new ID-token on every page refresh. That way there's a smaller attack surface as no malicious code could find the token from cookies or localStorage.
> Bonus point: if someone gets new roles in the IDP, all they have to do is refresh the page to have it apply

This is mostly outside of our control. This should be correctly handled by the client oidc framework, and should automagically do more or less what you want but through different mechanics. I would reffer to look at the mechanics of the refresh token in the oidc standard.

> Is the idea not to store the ID token on the client-side? Like in localStorage or in cookies?

Yes but the question here is should we for localStorage or rely on sessionStorage. Other choices seem to be much more difficult as these are the two that are obviously supported by the OIDC client framework. One difference is how susceptible the sessions are to cors attacks. It should result in a bit of a different user experience between the two in terms of how well a user can stay logged in between different types of shutdown. After my last discussion with a colleague im leaning towards retaning the default setting of sessionStorage for increased protection against CORS attacks.

> Are ID-Tokens meant to only be seen by the server, or are they given to the server by the user? In the case of the latter, we could instead just rely on the user always providing the ID-token themselves on each request, letting them keep track of the session and keeping the wharf-api stateless.

Typically ID tokens are not supposed to be seen by the server as the whole point of the original design spec of OIDC is to allow a familiar authentication/authorisation flow without having to fully disclose ones identity. However with the introduction of RBACs, and their use in custom claims its possible to setup ID tokens in such a way that they dont GDPR relevant userdata while still being fully functional as authorization level proof much like an access code would in the OAUTH spec.

Reviewer: My point there about only storing it in memory was that if we store the tokens in "memory", i.e. local/scoped javascript variables, instead of localStorage/sessionStorage then that makes it protected against XSS attacks, and since it's an SPA then the client won't need to make that many requests to the remote IDP anyway but instead only when opening a new tab or refreshing the page.

And that way if your remote account from the IDP has gotten more access roles then to refresh the client's token they only need to refresh their page to get the new access roles, as that will force the client to obtain a new token.

> Typically ID tokens are not supposed to be seen by the server /.../ its possible to setup ID tokens in such a way that they dont GDPR relevant userdata while still being fully functional as authorization level proof much like an access code would in the OAUTH spec.

That sh*t's baller :call_me_hand:

Author: JS variables are not a simple alternative here there may be a custom way of implementing it but since it would require alot more work i would see the present as a choice between local and session storage. Per meeting we belive sessionstorage is better than localstorage because the user can in a simpler way wipe the cache (opening/closing tab).

rfc_author_name: Fredrik Dyrvold # Or same as username, if you wish

# Leave these. Collaborator changes this before merging

impl_issue_id: 0
impl_issue_repo: iver-wharf/wharf-api
last_modified_date: YYYY-MM-DD
---

# {{page.title}}

- RFC PR: [iver-wharf/rfcs#{{page.pr_id}}](https://github.com/iver-wharf/rfcs/pulls/{{page.pr_id}})
- Feature name: `{{page.rfc_feature_name}}`
- Author: {{page.rfc_author_name}} ([@{{page.rfc_author_username}}](https://github.com/{{page.rfc_author_username}}))
- Implementation issue: [{{page.impl_issue_repo}}#{{page.impl_issue_id}}](https://github.com/{{page.impl_issue_repo}}/issues/{{page.impl_issue_id}})
- Implementation status: ![GitHub issue state](https://img.shields.io/github/issues/detail/state/{{page.impl_issue_repo}}/{{page.impl_issue_id}}?{{page.shields_io_query_params}})

## Summary

Wharf should have authentication. Wharf currently has no authentication.
This RFC will outline a plan to implement OpenID Connect (OIDC) in Wharf.
The plan shall be limited to authentication and authorization with
OIDC. User and group management will be offloaded onto the Identity provider
this requires using Identity providers which embrace the concept of

> Roll-Based Access Control. The initial implementation will also be limited

Reviewer 4: typo:
```suggestion
Role-Based Access Control. The initial implementation will also be limited
```

to only sourcing from 1 identity provider at a time, it will however be
possible to extend this to multiple different sources later.

## Dictionary

- OIDC - [OpenID Connect (OIDC)](https://openid.net/connect)

- IDP - Identity provider - some examples include
  [Google Workspace](https://workspace.google.com/intl/sv),
  [Azure AD](https://azure.microsoft.com/en-us/services/active-directory), and
  [Auth0/Okta](https://www.okta.com/)

> - RBAC - [Roll-Based Access Control](https://auth0.com/docs/authorization/rbac/)

Reviewer 4: typo:
```suggestion
- RBAC - [Role-Based Access Control](https://auth0.com/docs/authorization/rbac/)
```

- Issuer - In this RFC this refers to the issuer field in a OIDC metadata
  sheet. The issuer is an authority for validating JWT tokens used in OIDC.

## Motivation

Some claim a good feature of secure infrastructure is access control. Currently,
our only solution is network isolation. Being able to restrict access to varying
degrees is also a product goal to satisfy business needs.

Tying the user management of wharf to central repositories such as
organisation wide IDPs is good for a number of reasons.

- Centrally managed on/off boarding:

  - Leads to less administration

>   - Roll based security inheritance allows automatic updates of user access

Reviewer 4: typo:
```suggestion
  - Role-based security inheritance allows automatic updates of user access
```

    levels

- Piggybacking on existing password and user recovery routines results in a
  DRY style system architecture

- Near perfectly mirrored compliance with top level organisational
  security levels

## Explanation

By using the OIDC standard an authentication & authorisation system will be
built in a minimalist fashion that offloads most of the work involved in
administration to other pre-existing platforms.

![Connectivity visualised](../assets/auth-map-v2.PNG)

### The Access Token

A OIDC type access token can be used for authentication. The custom claims
(requires an IDP with support for RBAC) can be used to specify access levels.
To keep the scope manageable the task of dividing up and refining access
levels and permission will be left to a later date. For this RFC all kinds
of read permissions won't require valid tokens, but all write type requests
will require valid ID-tokens that have been signed by a pre-approved issuer.
The OIDC protocol defines a token called an
[Access Token](https://auth0.com/docs/security/tokens/access-tokens).
The access token is signed by the source issuer. This signature is then used to

> validity and authenticity of the token. See

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
validate the authenticity of the token. See
```
or
```suggestion
check the validity and authenticity of the token. See
```
?

Author: I guess techinically the authenticity is gained from the `aud` attribute which has to be checked separately when the whole token has been had its signature validated. Going with  `validate the token.`

[validating an OIDC Access Token](https://auth0.com/docs/security/tokens/access-tokens/validate-access-tokens).

### Session Management

The wharf-api is currently stateless and does not use sessions. It is

> possible to either include the token in every request to the server.

Reviewer 4: missing second option following "either"

Either
```diff
- possible to either include the token in every request to the server.
+ possible to either include the token in every request to the server, or [option two].
```
or remove "either".

Author: Rewrote the section - `A sample situation where this could be useful is
when an external third party should be granted view or admin rights over the
deployment pipeline.`

### Local development vs production environments

For the initial release of the feature the configuration will be tailored to
using azure as an IDP. These settings will as necessary be exposed as
environment variables to each respective docker image.

For use in offline developer environments it should be possible to switch on a
developer mode switch that allows bypassing validation of access
tokens such that a valid login is not required.

### Choice of Client

The OIDC standard defines a
[list of certified clients](https://openid.net/developers/certified/)
that can help simplify the implementation of ID Token retrieval.

For the backend a full client will not be required. As the tokens just need
to be validated and not requested. See
[validating an access token](https://auth0.com/docs/security/tokens/access-tokens/validate-access-tokens)

## Compatibility

> Expect no compatability between versions of wharf without authentication to

Reviewer 4: typo:
```suggestion
Expect no compatibility between versions of wharf without authentication to
```

versions of wharf with authentication. There is a potential threat in leaving
the system backwards compatible in that a non-secured version of the api could
run together in an otherwise secure cluster.

We should aim to pick a solution where any IDP supporting OIDC and RBAC can be
used. Locking ourselves to a single IDP when a standard such as OIDC exists

> seems like a  waste opportunity. Keeping the choice of IDP open will leave

Reviewer 4: typo:
```suggestion
seems like a wasted opportunity. Keeping the choice of IDP open will leave
```

more room for choice and flexibility in the future.

## Alternative solutions

There are many types of identity verification systems.
This RFC assumes that OIDC will be used. Within OIDC there are multiple
different [flow definitions](https://developer.okta.com/docs/concepts/oauth-openid/#choosing-an-oauth-2-0-flow).
We should primarily use `codeflow with pkce` as this is presumed to be the
most secure at the time of writing.

## Future possibilities

We may want to implement multiple different IDP sources. This could allow
login from different IDPs. A sample situation where this could be useful is

> when a third party view/control over the deployment pipeline.

Reviewer 4: Some words seem to be missing here in the second sentence, around "when a third party view/control over the".

Author: Now - `A sample situation where this could be useful is
when an external third party should be granted view or admin rights to the
deployment pipeline.`

---
layout: default

# This is just to fool remark-stringify not to escape & symbols

# See https://github.com/syntax-tree/mdast-util-to-markdown/issues/8

shields_io_query_params: label=issue%20state&logo=github&style=flat-square

# Update the following (it's YAML syntax)

pr_id: 13 # Update this with PR number/ID. No leading zeros
rfc_feature_name: authentication & authorization # Use kebab-case
title: "RFC-0013: authentication & authorization" # Update this with PR number/ID and feature name. Use leading zeros
rfc_author_username: fredx30
rfc_author_name: Fredrik Dyrvold # Or same as username, if you wish

# Leave these. Collaborator changes this before merging

impl_issue_id: 0
impl_issue_repo: iver-wharf/wharf-api
last_modified_date: YYYY-MM-DD
---

# {{page.title}}

> - RFC PR: [iver-wharf/rfcs#{{page.pr_id}}](https://github.com/iver-wharf/rfcs/pulls/{{page.pr_id}})

Reviewer: Fix in URL from https://github.com/iver-wharf/rfcs/pull/19

```suggestion
- RFC PR: [iver-wharf/rfcs#{{page.pr_id}}](https://github.com/iver-wharf/rfcs/pull/{{page.pr_id}})
```

- Feature name: `{{page.rfc_feature_name}}`
- Author: {{page.rfc_author_name}} ([@{{page.rfc_author_username}}](https://github.com/{{page.rfc_author_username}}))
- Implementation issue: [{{page.impl_issue_repo}}#{{page.impl_issue_id}}](https://github.com/{{page.impl_issue_repo}}/issues/{{page.impl_issue_id}})
- Implementation status: ![GitHub issue state](https://img.shields.io/github/issues/detail/state/{{page.impl_issue_repo}}/{{page.impl_issue_id}}?{{page.shields_io_query_params}})

## Summary

Wharf should have authentication. Wharf currently has no authentication.
This RFC will outline a plan to implement OpenID Connect (OIDC) in Wharf.
The plan shall be limited to authentication and authorization with
OIDC. User and group management will be offloaded onto the Identity provider
this requires using Identity providers which embrace the concept of
Role-Based Access Control. The initial implementation will also be limited
to only sourcing from 1 identity provider at a time, it will however be
possible to extend this to multiple different sources later.

> ## Dictionary

Reviewer: Kudos for adding this "Dictionary" section!

- OIDC - [OpenID Connect (OIDC)](https://openid.net/connect)

- IDP - Identity provider - some examples include
  [Google Workspace](https://workspace.google.com/intl/sv),
  [Azure AD](https://azure.microsoft.com/en-us/services/active-directory), and
  [Auth0/Okta](https://www.okta.com/)

- RBAC - [Role-Based Access Control](https://auth0.com/docs/authorization/rbac/)

- Issuer - In this RFC this refers to the issuer field in a OIDC metadata

>   sheet. The issuer is an authority for validating JWT tokens used in OIDC.

Reviewer: nit: "JWT tokens" = "JSON web token tokens"

```suggestion
  sheet. The issuer is an authority for validating JWTs used in OIDC.
```

Tying the user management of wharf to central repositories such as
organisation wide IDPs is good for a number of reasons.

- Centrally managed on/off boarding:

  - Leads to less administration

  - Role-based security inheritance allows automatic updates of user access
    levels

- Piggybacking on existing password and user recovery routines results in a
  DRY style system architecture

- Near perfectly mirrored compliance with top level organisational
  security levels

## Explanation

By using the OIDC standard an authentication & authorisation system will be
built in a minimalist fashion that offloads most of the work involved in
administration to other pre-existing platforms.

![Connectivity visualised](../assets/auth-map-v2.PNG)

### The Access Token

A OIDC type access token can be used for authentication. The custom claims
(requires an IDP with support for RBAC) can be used to specify access levels.
To keep the scope manageable the task of dividing up and refining access
levels and permission will be left to a later date. For this RFC all kinds
of read permissions won't require valid tokens, but all write type requests

> will require valid ID-tokens that have been signed by a pre-approved issuer.

Reviewer: So all "read" API operations will be available anonymously? Did I understand that correctly?

If that's the case, then why not require valid tokens for all endpoints? In what way does this keep the scope more manageable?

Author: Per discussion- A valid login will be required for all and any access. Custom roles need to be investigated further and should perhaps have their own RFC.

The OIDC protocol defines a token called an
[Access Token](https://auth0.com/docs/security/tokens/access-tokens).
The access token is signed by the source issuer. This signature is then used to
validate the token. See
[validating an OIDC Access Token](https://auth0.com/docs/security/tokens/access-tokens/validate-access-tokens).

### Session Management

The wharf-api is currently stateless and does not use sessions. To keep this
design tokens will be sent in every request to the server.

The option of introducing sessions as a way to store tokens may be reconsidered
at a later point. There seems to be a potential performance gain.

### Local development vs production environments

For the initial release of the feature the configuration will be tailored to
using azure as an IDP. These settings will as necessary be exposed as
environment variables to each respective docker image.

For use in offline developer environments it should be possible to switch on a
developer mode switch that allows bypassing validation of access
tokens such that a valid login is not required.

> ### SSL Config Required as a part of OIDC

Reviewer: lint: two empty lines, should only be 1

```suggestion
tokens such that a valid login is not required.

### SSL Config Required as a part of OIDC
```

For OIDC ssl is required. SSL certs will be inserted into the traefik config
and generated with openSSL as part of the repo setup.

### Choice of Client

> The OIDC standard defines a
> [list of certified clients](https://openid.net/developers/certified/)
> that can help simplify the implementation of ID Token retrieval.

Reviewer: The plan is to use https://github.com/damienbod/angular-auth-oidc-client right? I think it's better to specify that one here.

```suggestion
The OIDC standard defines a
[list of certified clients](https://openid.net/developers/certified/)
that can help simplify the implementation of ID Token retrieval.

For the frontend, <https://github.com/damienbod/angular-auth-oidc-client>
will be used.
```

For the backend a full client will not be required. As the tokens just need
to be validated and not requested. See
[validating an access token](https://auth0.com/docs/security/tokens/access-tokens/validate-access-tokens)

## Compatibility

Expect no compatibility between versions of wharf without authentication to
versions of wharf with authentication. There is a potential threat in leaving
the system backwards compatible in that a non-secured version of the api could

> run together in an otherwise secure cluster.

Reviewer: Currently we actually support Basic Auth. While this OIDC solution is incompatible with Basic Auth, I do think it would be wise to let users choose between Basic Auth, OIDC, and potentially completely unauthorized.

Enforcing OIDC and removing the two other (less secure) existing options would mean some customers can not upgrade Wharf.

I like the idea of deprecating the unauthorized alternative, and perhaps even the Basic Auth one, but not from the get-go. A bunch of deprecation warnings until non-OIDC solutions are completely blocked is how I envision such a transition at least.

Mixing auth solutions for the same Wharf instance/installation should of course not be supported.

Author: I agree with this. I think there will/should be an on/off switch for OIDC. If OIDC is off then basic auth could be enabled or disabled separately. This could cause some strange issues if both are enabled but dosent seem to be a real relevant problem that needs asap handling.

We should aim to pick a solution where any IDP supporting OIDC and RBAC can be
used. Locking ourselves to a single IDP when a standard such as OIDC exists
seems like a wasted opportunity. Keeping the choice of IDP open will leave
more room for choice and flexibility in the future.

## Alternative solutions

There are many types of identity verification systems.
This RFC assumes that OIDC will be used. Within OIDC there are multiple
different [flow definitions](https://developer.okta.com/docs/concepts/oauth-openid/#choosing-an-oauth-2-0-flow).
We should primarily use `codeflow with pkce` as this is presumed to be the

> most secure at the time of writing.

Reviewer: IMO this could be more decisive.

```suggestion
We will use `codeflow with pkce` as this is presumed to be the
most secure at the time of writing.
```

## Future possibilities

We may want to implement multiple different IDP sources. This could allow
login from different IDPs. A sample situation where this could be useful is
when an external third party should be granted view or admin rights to the
deployment pipeline.

When handling tokens from RBAC enabled IDPs it's possible to verify
custom permission levels using custom role claims.

> [See this link](https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/azure/role-based-access-control/custom-roles)

Reviewer: The page has a warning message:

> Adding a management group to AssignableScopes is currently in preview. This preview version is provided without a service level agreement, and it's not recommended for production workloads. /.../
>
> https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/azure/role-based-access-control/custom-roles

Is this something we need to worry about? Have you tested this feature, or is it hypothetical?

(You're not required to have tested this feature, as it's for a future plan and not of major importence right now. I'm merely curious)

Author: I have tested this in parts. Its hidden behind the azure premium paywall. Its executable through auth0/okta iaas.
